---
created: '2005-07-23'
title: Mozilla braindump
excerpt:
tags: [gentoo]
---

On Friday, for better or worse, I marked stable the current versions of
the `mozilla-*` ebuilds. These were pushed to stable quickly because of
security issues (98855 98846) in the older versions, plus extension
compatibility problems in mozilla.org’s first attempt at releasing a
security update. Here are the versions that went stable:

mozilla-launcher-1.41.ebuild
mozilla-1.7.10-r1.ebuild
mozilla-firefox-1.0.6-r2.ebuild
mozilla-thunderbird-1.0.6-r2.ebuild
mozilla-bin-1.7.10.ebuild
mozilla-firefox-bin-1.0.6-r1.ebuild
mozilla-thunderbird-bin-1.0.6-r1.ebuild

If that seems like a long list to you, well it does to me too! Along with
the security fixes, these ebuilds carry along a large number of
improvements:

  * post-installation chrome registration is handled by mozilla-launcher’s
    update_chrome() and the -register argument to the binaries. This is a
    huge improvement over dropping in an “initialized” tarball during
    src_install and hoping it worked. (It also starts us on the road to
    including extensions as separate ebuilds in portage, which was
    completely impossible before.)

  * The multilib-awareness of mozilla-launcher and the ebuilds has been
    improved via the MOZILLA_LIBDIR variable that is set in the stubs.
    This obviates the old multilib patch that was being applied to
    mozilla-launcher and allows us to change the installation directories
    far more easily.

  * Speaking of changing the installation directories, we now install to
    /usr/lib/mozilla-firefox and /usr/lib/mozilla-thunderbird instead of
    /usr/lib/MozillaFirefox and /usr/lib/MozillaThunderbird respectively.
    This was a purely aesthetic change, but one that certainly
    demonstrates that it can be done!

  * The mozilla-launcher stub in /usr/bin is installed by
    install_mozilla_launcher_stub() from mozilla-launcher.eclass. That
    makes installation of the stub generic and rescues us from some of the
    duplication in the ebuilds.

  * Plugins shouldn’t clash now because we’re no longer moving them around
    and creating symlinks, instead we’re setting MOZ_PLUGIN_DIR in
    mozilla-launcher.

  * The ebuilds have been re-organized and synchronized, which means that
    they should be easier to maintain in the future.

Maintaining the mozilla stuff takes a lot of effort. A huge amount of
effort. More effort than I can give it right now… This will be my last
weekend working on the mozilla ebuilds. Starting Monday, I intend to leave
their care and feeding to the rest of the mozilla team. It seems like a
good time since this week has seen so many improvements and we’re mostly
stable now.

Since that’s the case, here are some things that have been on my mind,
which I hope the rest of the mozilla team will see through. Terminology
note: I use “browser” to refer to any of mozilla, firefox or thunderbird.

Extensions in portage

Ideally, it would be nice to build enigmail (and possibly other
extensions) as separate ebuilds in portage. I spent quite a while on this
problem and was ultimately stumped. First, I tried to build enigmail by
massaging the Makefiles to use include files, tools and libs from
${MOZILLA_FIVE_HOME}. Gradually I prodded it along, but finally
surrendered to the notion that enigmail wants to be built in an unpacked
mozilla or thunderbird tree.

So I pursued using a stripped-down thunderbird ebuild, based on
instructions on the enigmail site, especially the later paragraphs that
talk about building it more quickly. I got quite a long way with that, but
could never get it actually working once it was installed. Finally, I came
across a message that indicated that installing global extensions in 1.0.x
is difficult/broken. I also found suggestions that 1.1 will make global
extension installation easier. My personal conclusion: Wait for
thunderbird-1.1 to build extensions in portage.

Some people have been very unhappy that I took enigmail out of the
thunderbird build in the first place. The reason it was taken out was that
the build wasn’t working in my testing, even on thunderbird-1.0.2. For
some reason the build process that we’ve been using for enigmail in
mozilla and thunderbird stopped working for thunderbird. It seems to still
work for mozilla, so I’ve left it there.

Note to the mozilla team: Nathan Adams says he has something working. The
only difference I can see between his effort and mine is that he’s using
make instead of emake. It would be worth following up on this, trying to
get it back into the thunderbird ebuild, until it can be properly split
out for thunderbird-1.1.x

Unmerge and -unregister

Recent versions of mozilla-launcher sport a new -unregister argument and
associated remove_chrome() function. The point is to be called in
pkg_prerm() so that the package can be completely uninstalled instead of
leaving the generated bits on the filesystem. The ebuilds haven’t been
modded yet for that, though, so there’s a task for somebody.

Patches

One of the reorganization steps I took recently was to sort the patches in
src_unpack() into architecture-specific, general compilation issues, and
behavioral changes. Furthermore, I made the sorting mostly the same
between the packages, so it should be possible to, for example, do a
meaningful diff between the current versions of the browser ebuilds.

A couple things I noticed: First, there is an alpha stubs patch being
applied in all the ebuilds. Is that still necessary? Is the patch the same
in all the ebuilds, and therefore could it be moved to ${DISTDIR} as I’ve
done for some of the other patches?

Second, not all of the architecture patches are applied in all the
ebuilds. For example, there is an hppa patch that is applied
inconsistently. What’s the story with that?

There are gcc4 patches being applied all over the place. Are those in
reality a common patch that could be applied from ${DISTDIR}?

Presently there are a few bugs open recommending cherry-picking patches
from Fedora and Ubuntu. I’d urge you guys to be careful about that. Some
of the patches are worthwhile and some are not. The closer you stay to
upstream sources, the easier it will be going forward. Usually Gentoo has
made a point of staying close to upstream, and I think that’s the right
route for the browser ebuilds. Just my humble opinion…

A final thought on patches: Right now many of the patches are applied from
either ${DISTDIR} or ${FILESDIR}. It might be advantageous to roll the
current set into a versioned tarball that is common for the browsers. You
could keep the tree of patches in subversion along with a script for
generating the tarball and putting it on the mirrors. That would reduce
the number of downloads people are doing per-ebuild.

Plugins

The plugins problem is this: many packages (for example acroread and java)
provide plugins written to the netscape API, which is supported by the
browsers. These plugins aren’t found by the browsers by default, because
they only look in ${MOZILLA_FIVE_HOME}/plugins

The original solution to this problem was architected by Azarah in
nsplugins.eclass: The plugin ebuilds would call inst_plugin to create a
symlink from the plugin to /usr/lib/nsbrowser/plugins. In src_install, the
browser ebuilds would move their own plugins to /usr/lib/nsbrowser/plugins
and make ${MOZILLA_FIVE_HOME}/plugins be a symlink to that dir.

This worked for a time, but was relatively difficult to maintain in the
ebuilds, and had the negative effect that the files in
/usr/lib/nsbrowser/plugins were owned by multiple packages.

Recently I attempted to solve this problem a different way: First I
created a patch which I thought would add /usr/lib/nsbrowser/plugins to
the default search path for plugins. Second I removed the code from the
ebuilds which would move the browser-installed plugins. I was hoping this
would allow both browser-installed and third-party-installed plugins to be
found automatically without all the hackery.

However the patch didn’t work (I don’t know why yet…) so instead I
resorted to setting MOZ_PLUGIN_PATH=/usr/lib/nsbrowser/plugins in
mozilla-launcher. For all intents and purposes, this works! It only has a
couple small issues, such as removing the user’s ability to set their own
MOZ_PLUGIN_PATH.

Whatever solution the mozilla team chooses for this problem, I’d suggest
first trying to make the patch work. It can’t be that hard, I’m just out
of steam! If that doesn’t work, then consider sticking with the
MOZ_PLUGIN_PATH solution. The least desirable solution is one that moves
plugins around and makes more symlinks, because that perpetuates the old
nsplugins.eclass complexity and makes full unmerge of the browser
difficult.
