---
logoLink: /2016/09/06/atari-basic
title: Home
---

## Hi, I'm Aron.

I'm a software developer based in Ann Arbor, Michigan. I work at
[Scampersand](http://scampersand.com/) building modern web applications for
clients.

I'm a [Pythonista](https://www.python.org/) and a
[Djangonaut](https://www.djangoproject.com/). Lately I've been using
[django-allauth](http://www.intenct.nl/projects/django-allauth/) and
[django-rest-framework](http://www.django-rest-framework.org/) to build OAuth
and API-powered sites. I'm a big fan of [twelve-factor
apps](http://12factor.net/), well-tested code, and using
[Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/) or [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) for
isolated development.

Prior to writing software for the web, I spent a number of years working on
low-level operating system software. I wrote a Gigabit Ethernet driver for
[Tru64 UNIX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tru64_UNIX), led the merge of
[Xen](http://xenproject.org/)/[IA-64](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IA-64) into
[Red Hat Enterprise
Linux](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/linux-platforms/enterprise-linux),
and I was one of the founding developers of the [Gentoo
Linux](https://gentoo.org/) distribution.

In the corner of my office there's a stack of frisbees and my cleats. Nothing
gets my attention more quickly than an offer to toss a disc, and on summer
evenings you'll find me out on the field grinning like a maniac as I'm [cutting,
marking, hucking and
bidding](http://ultimatefrisbeehq.com/ultimate-frisbee-terms) with [my ultimate
frisbee team](http://ripul.org/team.php?year=2019&team=6).

Ultimate has a concept called [Spirit of the
Game](http://www.usaultimate.org/spirit/), which refers to competing without
sacrificing mutual respect, adherence to the rules, or the joy of play. It's
something I love about ultimate, and an ideal to which I aspire in my work as
well. I strive to be patient and gracious under pressure, to speak respectfully
and listen in turn.

Below you'll find some things I've written, as well as links to some other
places you can find me online. I'm curious how you got here and what project you
have in mind; please [get in touch](mailto:aron@arongriffis.com) and let's talk
about it.
